hi everyone laszlo Montgomery back again
with more Robert fortune last time we
featured passages from his book
published in 1847 three years wanderings
in the northern provinces of China in
the three chapters have read excerpts
from fortune wrote of his first
impressions of Hong Kong and shaman as
well as other places I'd like to
continue on today with further passages
from this book of his travels and
observations made between 1843 and 1846
the highlights of this episode include
fortunes experiences seeing the newly
opened treaty ports of ningbo and
Shanghai these two cities will serve
more or less as the backdrop for the
adventures he had in subsequent trips he
made and the employ of the British East
India Company fortune me three more
trips to China after the success of this
maiden voyage these later trips were
made in 18-49 and in 1853 when he worked
as an undercover spy for the British
East India Company and later on in 1861
when he went as private citizen not on
any particular mission shanghai in
ningbo were two of the newly open treaty
ports that came out of the Treaty of
Nanjing that ended the first opium war
the passages in this episode act as a
nice time capsule that offers us
enjoyable first-hand accounts of
descriptions of ningbo and Shanghai in
the time of the dull Quang Emperor
although European and American smugglers
had been trading up and down the coast
for a hundred years this was the first
time trade was being carried out openly
and under the law fortune in addition to
his remarks and observations about the
land and the objects and structures he
saw gives us wonderful eyewitness
accounts of mixing with the local
Chinese inhabitants there quite a hoot
sometimes I think any Westerner who's
been to China for an extended period
could surely relate to some of the
situation's robert fortune found himself
in that's what's so great about this
book and many others i have
queued up for future episodes to come
even though these words are speaking to
us direct from the 1800's they still
have relevance in our day they still
resonate there was a time before the
Silk Roads and the age of discovery were
people didn't get around much because
well it wasn't so easy to pick up and go
anywhere so when it all started to
happen encounters began taking place
where people from different lands were
seeing each other for the first time
that's why I particularly like Robert
fortunes books he was one of the first
Europeans to go take a look see when
those five treaty ports were pried open
for the first time and like I said last
time he wasn't a bad writer so today
we're treated to a few gems as fortune
gives his first impressions of Joe Shawn
ningbo and Shanghai I'm not reading the
entire book just parts of it being a
botanist on a mission for the London
horticultural society later known as the
Royal Horticultural Society fortune goes
into quite a bit of detail about the
flora and fauna of the places he visited
so I'm going to spare you all that
interesting though it is it's quite a
contrast between the Shanghai of 1843 in
today's incredible ultra-modern
megalopolis with all its signature tall
buildings and amazing infrastructure
fortune provides us with a nice snapshot
of those days as well as Chinese
attitudes towards foreigners or at least
his version of what he thought they
thought that good old European 19th
century superiority bleeds right through
many of the phrases he uses some may
find his remarks distasteful they
certainly aren't appropriate in this day
and age but as a time capsule from the
afterglow of the Treaty of Nanjing post
opium war years I find them often
hilarious that people actually said
those things on the record so anyway I
hope you enjoy this a visited ningbo for
the first time in the autumn of 1843 it
was a
large town situated on the mainland
nearly west from the Shoshone group of
islands on the east coast of China it
stands about 12 miles from the sea at
the junction of two fine streams which
by their union form a noble River
capable of being navigated by the larger
vessels and chunks one of these branches
runs from the west and the other from
the south meeting at Ning bowl and over
the latter the Chinese have constructed
a bridge of boats for the traffic with
the suburbs on the opposite shore this
bridge is the most simple and ingenious
contrivance consisting of a number of
large boats moored at equal distances
across the river forming the basis on
which the upper woodwork rests and
enabling the whole to rise and fall to a
certain extent with the tide by this
means there is sufficient room under the
bridge to allow fishing and passage
boats to pass through at all times of
the tide providing it is not running too
strong it's spring tides the water
rushes through these spaces between the
boats with great velocity and sometimes
it is next to impossible to get through
the city itself is strongly fortified
with high walls and ramparts about 5
miles round and the space inside the
walls is almost entirely filled with
houses and most parts densely crowded
together there are two or three very
fine streets finer indeed and wider than
those of any other Chinese town which I
visited the good view of the city and
the surrounding country as far as the
eye can reach is obtained from the top
of a pagoda about 130 feet high having a
staircase inside by which the top can be
reached this pagoda is named tin funct
ah or the temple of the heavenly winds
is evidently very old and like many
others of the same kind is in a state of
decay whenever I visited this place the
Buddhist priests were always in
attendance with their offerings of cake
and tea for which a small gratuity was
expected when I first landed at Ning
ball the British consul mr. Tom had not
arrived and I was quite at a loss where
to go or to whom to apply for quarters
leaving my boat and servant on the river
I strolled away into the city to
reconnoiter
thinking that something might turn up
which I could use for my advantage I was
soon surrounded by crowds of the natives
and amongst them some blackguard boys
who had been corrupted to a great extent
by the troops during the war but who
luckily understood a little of the
English language and were able to be of
essential service to me they informed me
that there was only one home or in a
term which they apply to all Western
nations already in the city and
immediately led the way to his quarters
when we arrived at the house I was
surprised to find a former acquaintance
he was an American medical missionary
and was dressed Allah chinoise tail and
all complete but truth compels me to
state that his dress was rather a
ludicrous one afterwards when my
knowledge of the Chinese costume was
more complete I have often laughed when
I thought of the figure the little
doctor must have appeared in the eyes of
the Chinese the large flowing gown which
he wore was almost too fine for a
mandarin while the Hat was one commonly
worn by servants and coolies the English
reader if he wishes to understand the
strange sort of appearance the doctor
presented must imagine a London judge
clothed in his fine black flowing gown
and wearing the hat of a dustman I
recollect one evening after dark going
out into one of the main streets
accompanied by the doctor to see an
offering which was there presented to
the gods and I soon found that he and
his Chinese dress was a greater object
of attention than i was in my English
one how the Chinese laughed and enjoyed
the joke I had obtained a room in the
same house with my friend who was
visited daily by great numbers of the
Chinese and who although not a very good
was most zealous in the cause
of medical missions as the winter
approached the weather became extremely
cold and in December and January the ice
on the ponds and canals was of
considerable thickness the most
attractive shops in the city now were
the different clothing establishments
were all articles of wearing apparel
were lined with skins of various kinds
many of them of the most costly
description the very poorest Chinese has
always a warm jacket or cloak
with sheepskin or padded with cotton for
the winter and they cannot imagine how
the Europeans can exist with the thin
clothing they generally go about him
when the weather was cold I used to
always wear a stout warm greatcoat above
my other dress and yet the Chinese were
continually feeling the thickness of my
clothes and telling me that surely I
must feel cold their mode of keeping
themselves comfortable in winter differs
entirely from ours they rarely or never
think of using fires in their rooms for
this purpose but as the cold increases
they just put on another jacket or two
until they feel that the warmth of their
bodies is not carried off faster than it
is generated as the raw damp cold of
morning gives way to the genial Rays of
noon the upper coats are one by one
thrown off until evening when they are
again put on in the spring months the
upper garments are cast off by degrees
and when the summer arrives the Chinese
are found clad and thin dresses of
cotton or in the grass cloth
manufactured in the country in the
northern towns the ladies sometimes use
a small brass stove like a little oval
basket having the lid graded to allow
the charcoal to burn and the heat to
escape this day place upon their tables
are on the floor for the purposes of
warming the hands and feet nurses also
carry these little stoves and their
hands under the feet of the children
such however is the thickness and warmth
of their dresses that it is only in the
coldest weather they require them little
children and winter are so covered up
that they look like bundles of clothes
nearly as broad as they are long and
when the padding is removed in warm
weather and is difficult to imagine that
you see before you the same individuals
I never felt so cold in England as I did
during this winter in the north of China
and yet as may be seen from the chapter
on temperature the thermometer did not
indicate a very low degree the house in
which I lived was so open that the wind
rushed in at every crevice the windows
were large not glazed as with us but
papered and in many places perfectly
open during the day I got on very well
as I was always out and moving about
from morning until dark the
long evenings with the wind whistling
through the windows and blowing upon my
candle we're dreary and cold enough to
vary the monotony of the scene as well
as to warm myself I used frequently to
take a stroll down the Main Street the
Chinese as a nation are great gamblers
even the poorest of them cannot resist
the temptation and in this street after
nightfall there used to be numerous
stalls of oranges sweet meats and
trifling curiosities at each of which
there were dice of some kind and a wheel
of fortune surrounded by the Chinese and
great numbers trying their luck with a
few copper cash and Eve in Singh by
their looks and language the most
intense interest in the stopping of the
wheel or the throwing of the dice
besides the shops already noticed for
the sale of clothes and skins there are
many others worthy of our attention
there are a number of excellent silk
shops and warehouses a little off the
main street which like our old
established houses at home have but
little external show to attract notice
here to our large quantities of that
beautiful northern embroidery which is
so admired by all who have had an
opportunity of seeing it it is entirely
different from that commonly procured at
Canton and much more elaborate and
expensive a considerable demand for
articles of dress which would be
fashionable in England has induced the
Chinese to get them made and they are
now exposed for sale in all the towns in
the north frequented by the English
ladies aprons scarves shawls work bags
and many other articles made up in the
English style and beautifully
embroidered are the things most in
demand the Chinese estimate their
celebrated jadestone very highly and
here there are numerous shops both for
cutting it and exposing it for sale
carved into all those curious and
fantastic forms for which this people
are so well known the process of cotton
printing in its most simple and original
form may be seen in most of the streets
here as well as in other towns in China
rope-making is carried on extensively in
the suburbs near the river and some
strong cables and ropes for junks are
made from the bracts of the palm
formerly noticed and from the bark of
the bird Acacius plant commonly called
hemp by the English in the north of
China there are of course the usual
quantity of curiosity shops containing
bamboo ornaments carved into all
possible forms specimens of ancient
porcelain which are said to preserve
flowers and fruit from decay for an
unusual time lacquered wear and other
ornaments brought by the junks from
Japan many beautifully carved rhinoceros
horns bronzes and other articles to
which the Chinese attached great
importance purchasing them at exorbitant
rates apparently far beyond their value
but what struck me as being most unique
was a peculiar kind of furniture made
and sold in a street generally called
furniture street by foreigners who visit
ningbo there were beds chairs tables
washing stands cabinets and presses all
peculiarly Chinese in their form and
beautifully inlaid with different kinds
of wood and ivory representing the
people and customs of the country and
presenting in fact a series of pictures
of China and the Chinese everyone who
saw these things admired them and what
was rather strange they seem peculiar to
ningbo and are not met with yet any
other of the other five ports not even
Shanghai is all this beautiful work is
expensive it is of course only used in
the houses of the wealthy there are some
large banking establishments in ningbo
having connection with all the other
towns in the north and it is here
therefore that the value of money is
regulated the stocks rising and falling
exactly as they do in England there can
be little doubt that it is a place of
great wealth there are a large number of
retired merchants in the city and
suburbs who have made their fortunes in
early life and who now seek to enjoy
themselves amid the luxuries and
retirement of ningbo but these
circumstances unfortunately do not fit
it for a place of active foreign trade
and hence although it is large rich and
populous our merchants find the northern
port of Shanghai a far greater
importance as regards the sale of
European and American manufacturers and
the purchase of tea and silk the staple
productions
of the country and yet judging from
appearances one would think that a
considerable foreign trade might be
carried on at Ning ball as it is in
itself a large town is in the midst of a
populous country and has excellent water
communication with all parts of the
Empire time and the perseverance of our
merchants will soon show whether this
supposition is a correct one Shanghai is
the most northerly of the five ports at
which foreigners are now permitted to
trade with the Chinese it is situated
about 100 miles in a Northwest direction
from the island of Joe shun the city
stands on the bank of a fine River about
12 miles from the point where it joins
the celebrated Jung soo-jung or child of
the ocean the Shanghai River as it is
generally called by foreigners is as
wide at Shanghai as the Thames at london
bridge its main channel as deep and
easily navigated when known but the
river of bounds and long mud banks
dangerous to large foreign vessels
unless they happen to go up with a fair
wind and manage to get a good pilot on
board at the entrance of the river i
visited this place the first time at the
end of 1843 as soon as the port was
opened by Her Majesty's Council captain
Balfour and took up my quarters in a
kind of bank or government shroff
establishment in company with two or
three gentlemen who were here for
purposes of trade as none of us carried
a cooking establishment with us our
meals were necessarily of the roughest
description neither exactly Chinese nor
English but something between the two
our bedrooms were miserably cold often
in the mornings we would find ourselves
drenched in bed with the rain and if
snow fell they was blown through the
windows and formed wreaths on the floor
nevertheless the excitement produced on
our minds by everything around us kept
us in excellent health and in good
spirits and we made light of many things
which in other circumstances we might
have considered as hardships whenever we
moved out of the house hundreds of
people crowded the streets and followed
in our wake as anxious to catch a
glimpse of us as the crowds in London
are to see the Queen every door and
window was crammed with men women and
children who gazed upon us with a kind
of stupid wonder as if
had been inhabitants of the moon and not
the ordinary sons of earth the children
more particularly looked upon us with
the kind of fear and dread doubtless
implanted in their young minds by their
parents who had less or more of the same
feelings themselves the name we bore
grades ax or Devil's child was also
calculated to produce erroneous
impressions particularly on the minds of
the young and make them regard us with
superstitious horror in these times it
was quite common for us to hear such
expressions as the following the devil's
children are coming or come and see a
Devil's child and not infrequently
Quaid's ax was called out to us in
derision several complaints were made of
this conduct to the British Council by
parties who believed it to be very bad
policy at the first commencement of the
trade to submit to any marks of contempt
however slight and strong remonstrances
were promptly made by him to the doubt i
or head mandarin of shanghai this policy
was the very best which could have been
pursued with the chinese authorities and
the consequence was that in a very short
time the offense of appalachian was
rarely heard in the streets of shanghai
and if some little urchin remembering
the lesson so early taught him came out
with it unawares he was immediately
rebuked by the respectable part of the
bystanders the following incident shows
the kind of superstitious dread in which
we were held by the inhabitants a friend
and myself were asked to a dinner given
on board one of the vessels in the river
and as the cabin was much more
comfortable than our chair lyst fireless
rooms on shore we remain until nearly
eleven o'clock not only are the gates of
a Chinese town closed after dark but all
communication even with the streets and
the suburbs is cut off by numerous gates
and doors which are fastened up about
ten or eleven o'clock at night this has
doubtless been a very ancient custom to
prevent any sudden surprise by an enemy
or by the unruly populace themselves and
is still kept up in more peaceful times
when therefore we landed we found all
the gates in the suburbs closed and
locked and we had to pay us through one
at least before we could reach our
quarters not a sound was heard every
house was closed and all that dense
multitude which throng the street by day
had sunk into repose how shall we get
through said my friend shake the gate
said I perhaps the noise will bring
someone or perchance as it seems pretty
old it may give way we took hold of the
gate and gave it a good shake calling
out at the same time for someone to come
and open it the watchman's light was now
seen coming towards us and my friend
again called out to him to make haste at
last two men with their lanterns came up
in that dreamy state which I have
already noticed as a characteristic
feature in the Chinese race and muffled
up with skins as the night was very cold
they could not see distinctly who were
on the other side of the door and as
we've mumbled a word or two of Chinese
they were put completely off their guard
and suppose we were benighted
the bolts were drawn the door opened and
behold two of the dreaded red-haired
race stood before them I shall never
forget their astonishment when they got
their eyes upon us after the gate was
opened and whether they actually
believed us to be beings of another
world or suppose we had another army at
our back to take the city a second time
it is impossible to say but quick as
lightning they both turn their backs and
fled leaving us to shut the gates or
admit an army if we chose we walked
quietly home and neither saw nor heard
anything more of the bold guardians of
the night the city of Shanghai is
surrounded with high walls and ramparts
built upon the same plan as all other
Chinese fortifications of this kind the
circumference of the walls is about
three and a half miles and the greater
part of the inside is densely studded
with houses the suburbs particularly all
along the side of the river are very
extensive although the gates of the city
are closed soon after dark the people
are allowed to pass through afterwards
on the payment of a few cash when the
gate is open to one a whole crowd are
ready to rush through along with them
the first only paying the cash such as
the custom so that if a poor man comes
to the gate he is only to wait until one
richer that himself arrives when the fee
being paid they pass through together
Jos houses are met with in all
directions both in the city and suburbs
at certain parts on the ramparts also
these temples are built
out with idols worthy natives come to
burn incense bow the knee and engage in
the other ceremonies of heathen idol
worship fortune tellers and jugglers are
also in great requests and reap a rich
harvest by working upon the credulity of
their countrymen you meet these
characters and all the streets and
public squares in Shanghai and what is
very strange the sing song or
theatricals of which the Chinese are
particularly fond our frequently
exhibited in the temples this is much
opposed to our ideas of religion and
propriety but somehow or other the
customs of our celestial friends are in
many instances directly opposed to ours
the streets are generally very narrow
and in the day times are crowded with
people actively engaged in business the
merchandise which is the most striking
to a stranger walking through the
streets is the silk and embroidery such
as I formerly noticed at ningbo cotton
and cotton goods porcelain ready-made
clothes of all kinds beautifully lying
skins fur bamboo pipes six feet long and
nicely arranged in the shops pictures
bronzes and numerous curiosity shops for
the sale of carved bamboo ornaments old
pieces of porcelain and things of that
kind to which the Chinese attached great
value but articles of food form of
course the most extensive trade of all
and it's sometimes a difficult matter to
get through the streets for the immense
quantities of fish pork fruit and
vegetables which crowd the stands in
front of the shops besides the more
common kinds of vegetables the
shepherd's purse and a kind of tree foil
or clover are extensively used amongst
the natives here and really these things
when properly cooked more particularly
the latter are not bad dining rooms tea
houses and bakers shops are met with at
every step from the poor man who carries
his kitchen or bake house upon his back
and beats upon a piece of bamboo to
apprise the neighborhood of his presence
and whose whole establishment is not
worth a dollar to the most extensive
tavern or tea garden crowded with
hundreds of customers for a few cash
1000 or 1200 equal a dollar a Chinese
can die
sumptuous manner upon his rice fish
vegetables and tea and I fully believe
that no country in the world is there
less real misery and want than in China
the very beggars seem a kind of jolly
crew and are kindly treated by the
inhabitants Shanghai is by far the most
important station for foreign trade on
the coast of China is consequently
attracting a large share of public
attention no other town with which I am
acquainted possesses such advantages it
is the great gate the principal entrance
in fact to the Chinese Empire in going
up the river towards the town a forest
of masts meets the eye and shows at once
that it is a place of vast native trade
chunks come here from all parts of the
coast not only from the southern
provinces but also from Shandong and
Jing sure there are also a considerable
number annually from Singapore and the
Malay islands the convenience of inland
transit is also unrivaled in any part of
the world the country being as it were
the valley of the Jung soo-jung is one
vast plain intersected by many beautiful
rivers and these again joined and
crossed by canals many of them nearly
natural and others stupendous works of
art owing to the level nature of the
country the tide ebbs and flows a great
distance inland thus assisting the
natives and the transmission of their
exports to Shanghai or their imports to
the most distant parts of the country
the port of Shanghai swarms with boats
of all sizes employed in this inland
traffic and the traveller continually
meets them it gets a glimpse of their
sails over the land at every step of his
progress in the interior since the port
has been opened these boats bring down
large quantities of tea and silk to
supply the wants of our merchants who
have established themselves here and
return loaded with the manufacturers of
Europe and America which they have taken
an exchange our plain cotton goods are
most in demand amongst the Chinese
because they could dye them in their own
peculiar style and fit them for the
tastes of the people from what we know
of the geographical nature of the cut
tree there could be no doubt that all
the green teas and perhaps the greatest
portion of the black can be brought to
Shanghai at less expense than they can
be taken to canton or any other southern
towns except perhaps neat ball and as
the team man incur less risk and taking
their money home from the north owing to
the peaceable nature of the inhabitants
this will be another very great
inducement to bring their teas to
Shanghai I am aware that people
generally supposed black tea districts
to be nearer the port of food Joe than
either ningbo or Shanghai but it must be
recollected that very few of the black
teas now imported to England are from
the bow hey Hills as these teas are
considered coarser and much inferior in
quality to other kinds which are from a
very different country much farther to
the north and on the northern side of
the great mountain range the large silk
districts of northern China are close at
hand and there could be no doubt that a
large proportion of that commodity in a
raw state will be disposed of at
Shanghai taking therefore all these
facts into consideration the proximity
of Shanghai to the large towns of
Hangzhou soo Joe and the ancient capital
of Nanjing the large native trade the
convenience of inland transit by means
of rivers and canals the fact that T's
and silks can be brought here more
readily than to Canton and lastly
viewing this place as an immense mart
for our cotton manufacturers which we
already know it to be there can be no
doubt that in a few years it will not
only rival can't on but become a place
of far greater importance and when I add
that the climate is healthy the natives
peaceable and foreign residents
respected and allowed to walk and ride
all over the country to any distance not
exceeding a day's journey it will be
acknowledged that as a place to live at
it has many advantages over its southern
rival I've already said that this part
of China is a complete network of rivers
and canals these were often most
annoying to me in my travels over the
country when I happen to get off the
Emperor's highway a circumstance of no
rare occurrence I have often been
obliged to press a boat into my service
much against the will of
the owners more particularly when I
visited this region for the first time
because I was then unacquainted with the
localities in the Chinese always seem to
fear I might take or Rob their boats if
I succeeded in getting into them such
were the opinions formed a foreigners at
that time one day in particular I had
been a considerable distance inland to
the westward of Shanghai and on my
return by some means or other I got off
the beaten track and in pursuing my way
as I supposed in the proper direction I
was brought up by a large and deep canal
about two miles from where I stood I saw
a bridge and it was nearly dark I made
for it as fast as I could unluckily
however just as I thought my
difficulties were over being within
gunshots of the bridges I was again
stopped by another canal which crossed
the former one at right angles I was now
completely brought to a standstill but
in a few minutes I perceived a boat
approaching and a man tracking it on the
same side as that on which we were as
soon as it came near we called out to
the men on board to pull the boat
towards us and allow us to get across to
the other side they seemed much
frightened and after making the man who
was tracking the boat come on board they
pulled her into the middle of the canal
and then sculled away with all their
might they would soon have passed far
beyond our reach and left us to feel our
way in the dark or plunge through the
deep muddy canal necessity they say has
no law call out to them said I to my
servant that if they do not immediately
stop I will fire into the boat and kill
the whole of them and at the same moment
I fired one of my barrels a little way
ahead this was quite sufficient they
immediately came towards us and put us
quickly over to the other side I paid
them for their trouble and desire them
to be more civil to the next traveler
they might meet in the same
circumstances they went off in high
spirits and we heard them laughing and
joking about the adventure long after
they had passed out of our sight as an
agricultural country the plane of
Shanghai is by far the richest which i
have seen in China and is perhaps
unequaled by any district of like extent
in the world it is one vast beautiful
garden the hills nearest to Shanghai
distant about 30 miles they have an
isolated appearance in the extensive
plane and are not more than two or three
hundred feet high from their summit on a
clear day I looked round in all
directions and was only able to see some
few hills apparently having the same
isolated character far away on the
horizon to the south these i have since
ascertained are near the Tartar city of
job pool all the rest of the country was
a vast level plane without a mountain or
a hill to break the monotony of the view
the soil is rich deep loam and produces
heavy crops of wheat barley rice and
cotton besides an immense quantity of
green vegetable crops such as cabbages
turnips yams carrots eggplants cucumbers
and other articles of that kind which
are grown in the vicinity of the city
the land although level is generally
much higher than the valleys amongst the
hills or the plane round ningbo and
consequently it is well adapted for the
cultivation of cotton which is in fact
the staple production of the district
indeed this is the great nankin cotton
country from which large quantities of
that article are generally sent in junks
to the north and south of China as well
as to the neighboring islands both the
white kind and that called the yellow
cotton from which the yellow nankin
cloth is made are produced in the
district the soil of this district is
not only remarkably fertile but
agriculture seems more advanced and
beers a greater resemblance to what it
is at home than in any part of China
which i have seen one here meets with a
farmyard containing stacks regularly
built up and thatched in the same form
and manner as we find them in England
the land 2 is ridged and furrowed in the
same way and were it not for plantations
of bamboo and the long tails and general
costume of the natives a man might
almost imagine himself on the banks of
the Thames a very considerable portion
of the land and the vicinity of the town
is occupied by the tombs of the Dead in
all directions large conical shaped
mounds meet the eye overgrown with long
grass and in some instances planted the
shrubs and flowers the traveler
as well as at ningbo and Joe Sean
constantly meets with coffins placed on
the surface of the ground out in the
fields carefully thatched over with
straw or mats to preserve them from the
weather sometimes though rarely when the
relatives are less careful than they
generally are I met coffins broken or
crumbling to pieces with age exposing
the remains of the Dead I was most
struck with the coffins of children
which I met with everywhere these are
raised from the ground on a few wooden
posts and carefully thatched over to
protect them from the weather reminding
the stranger that some parent with
feelings as tender and acute as his own
has been bereaved of a loved one whom he
perhaps expected should chair and
support him in his declining years and
whose remains he now carefully watches
those in the higher ranks of life have
generally a family burial place at a
little distance from the town planted
with Cypress and pine trees with a
temple and alter built to hold the
Joss's or idols and where the various
religious ceremonies are performed a man
with his family is stationed there to
protect the place and to burn candles
and incense on certain high days others
again are interred in what may be called
public cemeteries several of which I met
with in the vicinity of Shanghai these
are large buildings each containing a
certain number of spacious halls or
rooms and having the coffins placed in
rows around the sides whilst at Shanghai
I was some other Europeans had an
invitation to go to the house of a
Mandarin to see a theatrical performance
or sing song and to dine with him in
Chinese style afterwards sedan chairs
were sent to take us to his house where
we were introduced to a number of his
friends and as the variable custom is T
was immediately handed round shortly
afterwards a servant came with a tray
full of wet warm towels not unlike those
generally used in kitchens at home and
presented one to each of us at first we
could not conjecture what these were for
but I'm looking at our Chinese friends
we observe them rubbing their faces and
hands with that man although not very
agreeable to us we immediately did the
same I afterwards found that this was a
common custom amongst the Chinese and I
have often been much refreshed by it
after
a warm walk in hot countries like China
this plan is much better and more
conducive to health than either washing
or bathing in cold water while this was
going on in the house the players were
getting everything ready in the large
room where the performance was to take
place in a little while one of them
entered the room where we were carrying
in his hand several fine long ivory
cards and which were written a number of
the most popular plays of the day any
one of which the players were ready to
perform at the command of our host and
his friends we were most politely
consulted on the subject which as we did
not know a single character of the
language and had the greatest difficulty
in understanding what was said to us was
not of much use having at last fixed
upon a particular piece for the evenings
entertainment we were all led into the
theater the room was large and nearly
square having a platform at the upper
end for the actors and ban and one of
the sides being only separated from an
open lane by a railing so that the
public might also have a view of the
play the center of the room was
completely filled with guests and from
the roof hung a number of lanterns in
the Chinese style as it was early in the
afternoon when the play commenced the
lanterns were not lighted and the piece
went on in daylight the Chinese actors
not excluding it as we do in our
theaters in England the play began with
some pantomime like feats such as we see
in English theaters at Christmas this
was succeeded by something which
appeared to be very pathetic judging
from the language and gestures of the
performers all was gone through in a
kind of opera style the actors singing
their parts with false voices the feats
of tumbling which were now and then
performed we're extremely dexterous and
clever and attracted our notice more
than anything else probably because they
were best understood the dresses of the
actors were superb and must have cost a
large sum of money there were no females
amongst them as it is not customary for
them to act but their places were
supplied by men or boys chosen from
amongst those who are most lady looking
and so well were their appearance and
dresses arranged that it would have
required a practiced eye to have
detected the difference the voices of
the actors were not musical
to englischers but the hole was in
unison with the noisy gong and the wind
instruments like bagpipes which are in
common use amongst the Chinese in fact
noise seem to be the thing which
produced the greatest effect and we
certainly had enough of it I was struck
by the various figures made by the
actors on the stage intended no doubts
to represent something like those scenes
or pictures which are so much studied in
our theaters at home a quadrant seems to
be a great favorite and was constantly
made by them in the different acts they
have no scenery to assist the delusion
only a simple screen which is sometimes
used to represent a room out of which
some actor is to make his appearance
fencing is much practiced and is perhaps
the most curious part of these
exhibitions each individual has two
sores which he swings about his head and
the wildest manner at the same time
throwing his feet and legs about in a
most fantastic way as if they had as
much to do in the business as the hands
and arms the exhibition or play lasted
for three hours and then we left the
theatre and retired into another room
while we were there the servants were
busily employed in rearranging the
theatre which was now to be converted
into a dining room when all was ready we
were led and with great ceremony and
placed in the principal seats of Honor
we had now an opportunity of seeing the
extent to which the Chinese carry their
ceremony and politeness amongst
themselves when they are about to be
seated at a table our host and his
friends were nearly a quarter of an hour
before the whole of them were seated
each one was pressing the most honorable
seat upon his neighbor who in his turn
could not think of occupying such a
distinguished place at the board however
after a great deal of bowing and
flattery all was apparently arranged
satisfactorily and dinner commenced the
tables were now covered with a profusion
of small dishes which contain all the
finest fruits and vegetables of the
season besides many of the most
expensive kinds of soups such as the
celebrated bird's nest and others many
of which were excellent even to the
palate of an Englishman the servants
were continually employed in removing
the centre dishes and replacing them by
others of a different kind
until at last everyone seemed perfectly
satisfied still however the ceremony of
bringing in new dishes went on and these
were merely looked at and removed are
made in efforts with the chopsticks must
have been a source of great amusement to
our Chinese friends but they were polite
enough not to laugh at us and did
everything in their power to assist us
the play was resumed again as soon as
the dinner commenced and continued as
briskly as ever the quote lady actors at
intervals came down from the platform
and supplied the guests with different
kinds of wines during the entertainment
piece of money was handed to each of the
guests which they were desired to leave
as a present for the actors at the
conclusion of the piece when this was
given them the whole of the core
dramatique came round and each made a
most polite bow of acknowledgment and
withdrew still however the dinner
ceremonial went on hundreds of fresh
dishes were brought in and as many in
their turn removed the Chinese guests
were sometimes smoking sometimes eating
just as it seemed good to them and
uniformly praising everything which made
its appearance on the table we had now
been three or four hours at table and
although the whole affair had been very
amusing we had had enough of it and
we're beginning to tire how long shall
the dinner last said I to a linguist who
was placed next to me and who had most
politely explained everything which had
occurred during the entertainment oh he
said it will ask for three or four hours
longer but if you want to go away you
may do so now we were very glad to find
that Chinese etiquette permitted us to
withdraw and ordered our chairs which
were waiting in the courtyard to receive
us our host and his friends lighted us
out with lanterns and we took our
departure in the same style in which we
came so ended my first Chinese dinner
since then such things have been no
rarity either in the palaces of the rich
or in the cottages of the poor and they
have been even more frequent in the
temples with the priests that wasn't too
bad was it I mentioned last episode that
a lot of these books from the 18th and
19th century that I've run across used
these mysterious spellings of Chinese
words you know Thomas Francis way
didn't come out with his Chinese
romanization system until 1867 and the
father-son team of Herbert and Lionel
Giles didn't perfect waves work until
nineteen twelve so I'm left in a kind of
a no man's land with fortunes random
spellings of Chinese words take for
example the dolt I fortune spells they
at TA oh you tae I had the damnedest
time trying to find out what is that and
what is the pinion equivalent so that I
could pronounce it correctly quite a
process i can only say thank God for the
Google and Baidu and my amazing powers
of logic and deduction had to further
complicate the matters I had never come
across that term before doll tie so this
was a case of searching how to pronounce
a word that I didn't even know what it
meant so in fortunes day that dolt I was
the top official in the treaty port area
who had the unenviable job of being the
decider as far as all the bitching and
moaning carried out by the foreigners
you could tell easily from the tone of
fortunes writing that the man is as
pushy and arrogant of a westerner as
they come and he was probably no worse
than the rest of the home RN as they
were called home RN that's a nice term
red-haired man a nice catch all word to
describe western people regardless of
their hair color and one other thing not
sure if you picked up on Fortune's
offense at being called a Grayson or any
other pejorative term the Chinese gave
to Westerners he refers to Quaid's
Devil's child Kwai means ghost or devil
slow means son or in this case a a noun
suffix it was perfectly all right for
fortune to look down his nose and to
call the locals and to laugh at
their unfamiliarity with Westerners or
Western sensibilities yeah good old
imperialism I promise you lots more to
come you'll certainly hear it time and
again that Western privilege and snarky
remarks from fortune and others who
scoff at the locals and their customs
and particularly get a kick out of
Robert fortunes remarks about trade and
it's just starting to happen foreign
trade on a much grander scale than
before and fortune doesn't disappoint in
his remarks concerning the potential for
British trade with China and having been
in this business myself for more than a
quarter century and having worked with a
firm in ningbo for the past 15 of those
years listening to his description of
the city as he saw it in 1843 is quite a
thrill and I know not everyone
appreciates it but I got a kick out of
fortunes analysis as to the merits of
doing business and Shanghai versus
guangzhou at least as pertained to the
tea and silk trade and when he said back
in the 1840s that Shanghai had a lot of
potential as a place of Commerce he
wasn't far off the mark and again I
think I mentioned this already fortune
keeps referring to his location as
northern China ningbo and Shanghai were
hardly in northern China if he thought
that place was cold he's lucky wasn't
actually in northern China in many in
fact most of the volumes I have queued
up I have to say I'm just a sucker for
these situations where east meets west
and I'm particularly interested and
amused about fortunes first impressions
of encounters with Chinese culture or in
this case fortune soiree at the
mandarins crib his remarks about
everything from the hot towel to the
local opera are interesting he
definitely wasn't a fan of chinese opera
i think he made that clear so next time
we meet I'll gather up a few more juicy
passages out of his debut bestseller
published in 1847 and then we'll move on
to his two books where he carried out
his great feats of industrial espionage
all to come as I mentioned last episode
there's a new documentary out from
French directors Charles Antoine de roof
anja Holmes chemla it's called lucky
I'll to t or t war it's beautiful film
and tells Robert fortunes story it's
from French production firm la compagnie
de taxi brousse it just came out in
November 2016 on art TV at La phones
so you should be able to stream it from
there vimeo channel soon or buy the DVD
your humble narrator makes his french
cinema debut in this very picture anyway
that's all I got for you this time more
yucks and vintage words from over a
century ago coming in the next episode
hey what do you think two episodes in a
row the length falling shorter than how
it's advertised in the show's title
anyway this is laszlo Montgomery signing
off from somewhere east of Hollywood
wishing you my very best and hoping
you'll consider sticking with the
program for at least a few more times
and that you'll join me next time for
another entertaining episode of the
China vintage hour and let me say I'm
going to put the word hour in quotation
marks oh and did I say you can get this
China vintage our the Chinese sayings
podcast and the internationally
award-winning China history podcast all
at teacup dot media well you can teacup
top media take care everyone see you
next time